Artist Statement

My project is intended to critique the hidden costs of digital creation and the extractive nature of the inetraction between human and computer. The project is called Nature Observer where the user is put in an environment that seems to have nothing wrong with it. The user then has to engage with the destruction of nature.

My goal was to create a simple simulation of nature, planting trees and watch the clouds. I then thought of how computers need a lot of data to work. It has a bit of irony, every click, you think you are helping. The extraction count goes up, the grass turns brown and the sky turns grey. Even in a video game, our actions have cost. This is not real nature but digital nature. Every click sort of represents the energy cost of tehcnology. When the count goes up, the world loses its color because the power is being used up by the trees being planted (digitally clicked). Once you hit 15 trees, the mask falls off. The game stops pretending to be a nice planting simulator and shows you that it is really a data mess where you are draining the energy from the world with every click. The visuals of the project are intentionally deceptive. I chose a sort of 8-bit look, which in my opinion makes the game feel kind of "safe". When the user first enters the world, they see clouds drifting in the sky peacefully. I used Math.random() function to give each cloud its own unique speed, these epeeds range from 0.05 to 0.15. The clouds having different speed creates a sense of a living atmosphere. However, as the extractionCount increases, the danger experience starts and it is meant to feel uncomfortable. The clouds were once white and fluffy and turn dark and scary, using rgb(darkness, darkness, darkness). That represents smog/pollution, it turns into a sort of industrial wasteland.

I found it challenging to manage the screen itself. To make the character move I needed to use the parseint() function because the CSS positions are stored in pixels but you cannot perform math on pixels. By turning it into a number I was able to restrict the character's Y position so they could not walk into the sky and forcing them to stay on the ground.

Moving on from the character's movement, one of the technical focuses was using event.pageX and event.pageY to link the user's mouse movement to the digital environment. Every click is a data point. WHen the createTree() function is called, not only does it place a div but it decides the future of the world with if and else statements. For example, if the counter is under 15, the user's dream of planting trees is satisfied and the goals are met, but once the lmit is hit, the code fights back and breaks. For the trees on the other hand, the jitter was a math formula using (Math.random() - 0.5) * 4. By subtracting 0.5, this allows the trees to shake left and right which makes it give that vibration and unstable visual look.

One of the readings I used was the article "These Women Tried to Warn Us About AI" from Rolling Stone. The women in that story, such as Timnit Gebru, warned the big tech companies that AI uses too much energy and steals too much data, if we don't stop, it will hurt the environment. So I took inspiration to make a project that shows that using too mcuh technology, in this case digitally planting trees in a digital environment, kills it. The game tries to tell to player to stop clicking, with a Critical message but the player continues to click until the screen turns black and the game is over. The researches warned that AI is a system that repeats patterns without understanding the damage it causes. In my game, the user keeps clicking to plant trees because we have been told that doing so is good, but the irony is that they don't see the code that drains the system. The user, just like the tech industry, usually ignores the red text to keep producing.

I also looked at Karen Hao's "Artifical Intelligence is Creating a New Colonial World Order." Hao explains that technology isn't virtual but it relies on plhysical ressources from the earth that were extracted. My main variable is extractionCount which is a reference to this. Every time the player clicks, they aren't just adding a digital tree to the screen, they are extracting the life of the game world. The sepia drain and the grayscale are the main visual change of the environment in which the life of the scene starts to die. You think that you are giving life to the world but for every extra click you are actually draining it. The world loses a percentage of its life.Connecting my project to Karen Hao's research on "Data Colonialism" let me frame the game as a critique of how we view the space. We think that the internet is something that is so weightless or something that is floating. Hao reminds us that the reality is that it is made of minerals, heavy machinery and exploited labor. In my game, the ground is that site of that extraction. By forcing the character to stay on the ground, all while using boundaries, I highlight that we cannot escape the physical reality of our technology.

I would like to touch on the idea of "the Late Age of Print". I read an the article Siren Shapes by Michael Joyce in which he stated we were entering the "Late Age of Print", which is a time where a very dominant digital era is upon us, where books are not forgotten but put aside. In this digital era, we are always writing onto the world with our clicks and our data. Every tree the user plants is a "scriptor", as Joyce calls it, adding to the digital pile. In my game, the more you write, the less space there is for actual life. THe "New Colonial World Order" that Hao warns us about is one where the "Digital" completely replaces the "Physical". By the end of the game, the screen turns black not because the game is over but because there is nothing left to extract, there is no energy left in the world. THe power is gone and the user is left alone in the void.

For the transition from the trees into the glitch phase, it represents the collapse of the  system. I used Math.random() to create a sort of jitter effect. Tge red squares shake and flash. In the course readings, I saw how you can explain an idea through play. The glitch is designed to shock the user to seem like a system failure. WHen the world is healthy, the animation is smooth, the clouds are moving steadily. WHen the extraction limit is reached, the world becomes unstable. Eventually, the world becomes so heavy with data that it can no longer function and the interaction ends which leaves the user in a dark environment.

There is also an article by Joana Moll called "The Hidden Life of an Amazon User" in which she talks about how much CO2 is produced every time someone buys something on Amazon. For me, this fits my project perfectly because my game tracks how much life is lost every time someone clicks a tree. Moll tracks the massive amount of data and energy required to load a single webpage and make a purchase. She argues that the user is actually a source of free labor for big tech companies and we generate data that fules a big energy demanding system. I try to demonstrate this with the extraction count, I compare it to Moll's CO2 tracker. By buying products on Amazon we are unknowingly contributing to the environment decay.

Works Cited:

Rolling Stone. (2002, August 11). These Women Tried to Warn Us About AI.

Hao, Karen. (2022, April 4). Artificial intelligence is creating a new colonial world order. MIT Technology Review.

Joyce, Michael. (1988). Siren Shapes: Exploratory and Constructive Hypertexts.

Moll, Joana. (2018). THe Hidden Life of an Amazon User.

